Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Technology Manager for
Development Tools,
Godfrey DeDorji.
Good afternoon.
Welcome to the Exploring
Project Builder IDE session.
I hope you've been having a great show.
You've probably seen Project Builder in
various other sessions along the way.
In this session,
we're going to talk to you about
all the things that we've been
doing over the past year with it.
And to do that,
I'd like to introduce Mike Ferris,
the manager of the Project Builder team.
So I'm going to just
get things started here,
and then I'm going to pass off to
one of the other guys in my group
to run us through some demos.
But before we do that, well,
first of all, let's see what we're
going to cover today.
So we've just released a beta
release of Project Builder,
the developer tools in general.
We shipped out a CD earlier this month,
and there's the one that you
got with your Jaguar stuff,
too.
I'll talk about that a little.
But we want to really concentrate on
some of the new features here while also
giving you an overview of everything.
And just so that those of you who've
actually used Project Builder quite
a bit have something to not bore you,
we're going to try to also point out
some things that are lesser-known
features that not everybody knows about,
just to make sure everybody kind
of has an idea of some of the more
advanced stuff that you can do.
So here's the itinerary.
I want to cover a little bit
about the CDs that you have,
talk a little bit about
what will be after that.
Then I want to go through some
underlying project concepts
that Project Builder uses.
Then we'll have a tour
of the IDE's feature.
And then at the end,
I'll come back and talk a little
bit about future directions for PB.
So let's start with talking a little
bit about what we've been doing,
the CDs that you've gotten
here at the conference.
So first of all,
there's the April 2002 Developer CD.
This is an update, our normal sort of
periodic updates of the CD.
This CD contains a beta
release of Project Builder,
a beta release of the GC3 compiler.
You also have the Jaguar Seed CD,
which is similar content.
It actually has a slightly
newer Project Builder than
the one on the April CD.
And then we'll talk just a little
bit about what's coming after Jaguar.
So, first of all, the April CD.
Again, this is a beta release
of Project Builder 2.0,
which has some major new features that
we want to get some input on you before,
from you, before we finalize them.
We feel that the Project Builder
2.0 beta is quite solid,
but like I said,
we'd like your feedback on how we
can improve some of the new features.
We feel that the Project Builder
2.0 beta is quite solid,
but like I said,
we'd like your feedback on how we
can improve some of the new features.
before we call it finally released.
We also have the GC3.1 prerelease.
So, you know,
use the 2.0 IDE if it's working for you.
If you like it, you know,
build your projects and ship them.
That's great.
But don't, please,
ship code that you've built
with GC3.1 in this release.
The Jaguar final release will
have a GCC3 that we will,
you know, be endorsing as what you should
be using to build your code,
but we're not quite ready
for you to do that yet.
So once we get to the
final release of Jaguar,
That's when the beta will go away here.
So we'll be shipping the final
version of Project Builder 2.0.
We'll actually probably
call it 2.0.1 or something.
And it will be concurrent with
the OS release for Jaguar.
And then after that,
we'll be doing our ongoing
periodic releases as we usually do.
So, okay, that's a little bit about
the product roadmap.
Now let me talk about some
of the underlying concepts
that Project Builder uses.
And I know a lot of you are coming from
other IDEs or other environments which,
you know,
have slightly different concepts.
And I think that if you, you know,
take some time to learn about
the Project Builder concepts,
you'll have a lot easier time sort
of coming up to speed on how to
use Project Builder effectively.
So these are the main concepts
that I want to cover today.
And these are the main building blocks
for projects in Project Builder.
We'll just dive into them one at a time.
In the, uh, the main thing, you know,
that you have in Project Builder
is a big list of files that are
going to be processed in some way.
The files are organized
as references and groups.
References represent files
that your project uses.
Actually, they can represent files that
your project doesn't use too if
you just want to have access to
them from within Project Builder.
You can organize files,
you can organize these references
in user-defined groups.
These groups can match the structure
of the file system folders or not.
You can organize them
basically however you want.
References use paths to refer to
the files that they represent.
There are basically two kinds of
paths that a reference can use.
It can either use an absolute path
or it can use a relative path.
And if it's using a relative path,
it can be relative to
a number of locations.
It can be relative to the
project directory as a whole.
folder associated with the group
that contains the reference.
or it can be relative
to your build results.
So for instance,
the reference to the app that your
target builds is going to be a
build product relative reference,
which means wherever you
choose to do your builds,
that's where it expects
to find that application.
The next major concept in
Project Builder is targets.
And targets are made up of build
phases as well as build settings.
A target defines how to build a project.
actually how to build
a particular product.
A project can contain
multiple targets if,
for instance,
you have a project that you want to
build a framework and an application
that uses that framework and then several
plug-ins that the application might load.
Each of those individual products
will be represented by a target.
Build Phases is one of the concepts that
is somewhat unique to Project Builder,
at least possibly not familiar to
people coming from other environments.
Phases represent the steps
that the target will take in
order to build your project,
and typically phases represent
specific activities like
compiling a set of source files,
linking the resulting O files together,
copying a bunch of stuff into your
framework resources directory.
We also have some build phases
that allow you to get more custom.
For instance, at any point in the
target's build phase list,
you can insert a shell script build
phase that will call out and execute a
shell script at that point in your build.
The other main thing that a
target has besides the build
phases is build settings.
What build settings allow you to
do is basically control options
for lots of different things.
Various compilers have build settings
that they pay attention to that
affect the options for the compiler,
what flags are being passed.
Same with the linker.
There are other build settings that
control the overall build process.
The build settings,
you often have custom UI that
tells you a little bit about what
these build settings are to set
some of the more common ones.
But there's also a bunch of
other settings that we will be
exposing with better UI over time,
but for now are often available only
through an expert settings table.
And there's a release note on
the system that's linked to from
the Project Builder release notes
that describes in some detail all
of the different build settings
that are available for you to use,
even if they're not represented
by a specific UI in the
target editor currently.
Here's another thing that is potentially
a new concept to folks coming from other
IDEs or from make file-based systems.
I'm told actually that
Visual Studio has a similar feature.
Build styles allow you to customize
the settings in the target.
So instead of, say,
duplicating your target and
having two copies of your target
that builds your application,
one that builds it with debug
symbols and one that builds it,
you know, without debug symbols,
for when you're ready to ship,
you can set up one target that
knows how to build your application,
because after all, you're building the
same thing both times,
you're just changing a little
bit the way that it's built.
And then you can define build
styles that will actually override
the settings and allow you to,
you know, say, "Okay, well,
when I'm building for development,
"I'd like for there to be debug symbols,
"but if I'm building to
ship to my customers,
"I don't want the debug symbols."
You can use build styles to
override or add to any settings
that the target might have.
Build settings.
You can't use build styles to alter, say,
the list of files that
are built by the target,
but you can use it to deal
with any of the build settings.
And the override is dynamic,
so as you change what the
active build style is,
the overrides are applied on
top of whatever settings the
targets that you're building have,
and if you change it to another one,
that's recomputed.
This is used for a number
of different things.
So I mentioned, you know,
development versus deployment.
You can also use it for
special compiler options.
You know,
let's say that you want to try out GCC3.
But because we've told you not
to ship your code that way,
you don't want to actually make
the project use GCC3 all the time.
You'd like to be able to sort of
enable that for testing purposes.
Well, you can set up a build style that
switches the compiler to GCC3.
And then, you know,
when you normally build,
you'll use the old compiler.
You'll be fine to ship your app.
But for testing,
you can choose the GCC3 build
style and do it that way.
So the final concept that I want
to cover here is executables.
Executables represent things in the
project that the debugger can run.
So actually you can run them
directly or you can run them
under the control of the debugger.
An executable is automatically
created for any target that builds
something that is directly executable.
So if you create an application target
or you create a Unix tool target,
then you'll automatically get an
executable that represents the
thing that that target builds.
But what if you're building a plugin?
Let's say that you're
building a Photoshop plugin.
Now that you can build Photoshop plugins
using Cocoa and Mako and so forth,
with all the great integration
that the Carbon and the
Cocoa guys have been doing.
You build your Photoshop plug-in,
but you can't just launch
a Photoshop plug-in,
right?
You have to launch Photoshop and
then load your plug-in.
So you can create a custom
executable inside Project Builder
that points at the Photoshop that's
installed on your system,
and then when you say debug,
it's actually going to run
Photoshop in the debugger.
When it comes up, you load your plug-in,
and you can debug.
Executables,
in addition to just pointing at the
thing that they're going to execute,
give you some control over
the execution environment.
So, for instance,
you can specify command line arguments,
or environment variables,
and various other runtime options
within an executable that will then
take effect when you run or debug that.
And starting in Project Builder 2.0,
executables are no longer
associated with a specific target.
So once again, you know,
if I have an application target,
an executable for that app
is automatically created,
but it's not part of that target,
so the active executable and the
active target are now separable things.
If I switch to make an
application target active,
it'll also make its executable active.
But if I have 50 plug-ins
and I switch between them,
I don't have to define
50 custom executables,
all of which run, you know, Photoshop.
You can just have one of them,
and it can remain the active
executable as you switch
between the different plug-ins.
So these are some of the main
concepts that Project Builder uses.
And I really encourage you
to look at the documentation.
We're adding more and more
conceptual documentation to
explain sort of what the underlying
concepts are behind Project Builder.
And if you take the time to
become familiar with them,
I think you'll be a lot
more productive with PB.
So enough of this boring stuff.
Let's actually see a tour.
And to do that,
I'm going to bring up Lance Saleme,
who is an engineer on
the Project Builder team.
He joined us around WWC last year and is
responsible for a lot of the multi-window
UI you see in Project Builder 2.0.
I also am going to
introduce Scott Tooker,
who is our QA engineer
and part-time coder.
He has been doing a lot of
sort of polished bug fixing
for us and is responsible for
a lot of the new context menus.
So take it away, Lance.
Okay, thank you, Mike.
So I'm going to give you a whirlwind
tour of a cross-section through all
of the features in Project Builder.
A lot of you are experts,
but please stick with us because
we're going to point out some of
the new features as we're going.
We're going to talk about the interface
concepts and the multi-window UI.
It has spent some time on
accessing documentation,
move on to navigating
and searching projects,
navigating editing code,
using source control,
and then talk about some of the build
system features and new features,
and then the debug and
new debug features.
So let's move straight into
the interface concepts,
which is some of the biggest changes
you'll see in Project Builder 2.0.
The first thing you'll do as a new
user or getting started with your
project is to create a new one.
You'll find a lot of options under that,
and we'll see some of those in the demo.
But you'll then move into using
the project workspace window.
And for a long time,
Project Builder has been
a one-window interface,
so you'll see all of your content
and all of your tools combined
together in this single interface
with a simple animation to move
between the pieces that you focus on,
the pieces of the work that you're doing.
They're broken down
into the content tabs,
which are along the
left edge of the screen,
and the tool tabs,
which usually are across the top,
and then the built-in editor itself.
Okay.
Something new in 2.0 is the
work we've been doing for the
multi-window user interface.
You've probably seen some of
this already during the sessions,
especially with AppleScript Studio.
It was right before this.
They heavily used the multi-window
user interface to organize and work
within the project for their demos.
To understand how we decided to break
out the windows for the multi-window UI,
you have to have an understanding
of the development tasks.
And these are kind of
arbitrary decisions.
And we've made some decisions
on our part to break out all the
various activities that you do,
to build your application,
to work with it, debug it, et cetera.
So you'll see tasks
related to the project,
source editing, classes, targets, help,
and then the fine building, debugging,
and running pieces as well.
Now, we can't second-guess.
We don't know everything that you may
want to do with the environment and
exactly how you want to set it up.
We tried.
Everybody gave us a different answer.
It became impossible.
It became impossible to try and
make every possible window work and
have preferences for every window.
So you'll see that we
have window templates.
And these allow you to decide how you
want to organize the tools and tabs in
your windows for the development tasks.
So we'll go straight into a demo,
and I'll speak more
about it as we're going.
cheat sheets here.
So the first step would, of course,
would be to open a new project.
And you'll see that we have a lot of
support for building Cocoa applications,
Java, standalone UNIX tools and,
and AppleScript Studio if
you're using that.
But for our demo purposes,
we're going to start with
an existing application.
And Scott's going to bring up the window,
and he'll show you the traditional
view onto Project Builder.
So as you see,
we have the content tabs for files,
classes, bookmarks, targets,
and the breakpoints.
And then across the top,
you have batch find within
the project building,
So, let's get started.
So, I'm going to start off
by talking about the
So let's take a look at some of the
preferences that are new to 2.0,
specifically in task templates.
You're going to find that a
lot of you are very happy with
the user interface as it is,
and we want to acknowledge that and
keep a single window interface for you,
so you're, you know,
just go ahead and use it
as you've always used it.
Some of you maybe want to keep
more information about your
build pieces as you're going,
your run results, your batch finds,
so we have a some windows option.
which breaks those out
into separate windows.
But for the case of the majority
of people and for this demo,
we're going to focus on
the many windows version.
[Transcript missing]
And then we'll go in and
edit that new template.
And let's say you want to always
have your breakpoints visible.
Open up the breakpoints tab,
size the column the way you want it.
Resize the window the way you want it.
You can hide and show other tabs if
you find that you don't need them.
At the bottom there you'll see that.
So once he's got the window
in the configuration that
he's most comfortable with,
He can then save the changes.
And then any time a new window
for debugging is brought up,
it's brought up from that configuration.
Okay, so I think we're ready to
go back to... I'm sorry,
I should say, now that we've created,
let's go back and actually reassign it.
So you'll see that now his template
is assigned to the debug task.
Okay, I guess we're ready to
go back to the slides.
So, one of the other common aspects
of doing your development is
to get to your documentation.
Accessing documentation is quite
well integrated into Project Builder.
You'll find a number
of access paths for it.
You have the Help menu for
accessing Help Developer Center,
the Developer Help Center.
Then you have Project Builder Help,
Developer Tools,
and Project Builder Tutorials,
as well as Framework References,
Release Notes,
and Integrated Documentation features,
which we'll talk about in the demo.
At this point,
I'd like to give you a heads
up on a new capability or a new
feature that we're offering,
which is a print-on-demand book called
Developing with Project Builder.
And this contains the Project Builder
help and tutorials for those people
who really want to have a printed-out
version of the help available next to
them while they're doing their job.
Yeah.
This is in conjunction with Vervante,
and it will be available
the summer of this year.
See your URL down there at the bottom if
you want to get some information on it.
So another major natural part
of doing your development is
navigating in the projects.
Since we have multi-window UI now,
there's a new impetus to have shortcuts
and simple ways of moving between the
windows to not stopgap you or to not slow
you down and keep your progress moving.
So we have some new menus and
toolbar items to move between the
various task windows directly.
In the case of the Class Browser,
we have some more of the integrated
documentation features where you can
get directly to API documentation,
and then if that Class Browser isn't
set up exactly the way you want,
you can create advanced options
which isolate and filter out which
pieces of the class hierarchy
you're interested in seeing.
As Mike mentioned,
we have the Group Tree,
which is your logical organization
of files and frameworks.
So it's obvious that sometimes you'll
want to be able to jump directly back
to a file that you're working on,
see exactly where it is
in the entire project.
So we have a shortcut which
is Reveal in Group Tree.
We'll show that in the demo.
And then finally, it's not really new,
there's some new features for bookmarks,
though.
There's the context menus
pretty much everywhere that
you're working with the file,
so you can create a bookmark and have
it available later on when you're
moving between the other tasks.
Next we'll move into searching projects.
This is a common feature of IDEs.
You have the batch finder.
Of course you have textual
search and replace,
but we have a very nice
regular expressions search
and replace we'll demo.
And then we have definition searches,
which help you get directly to the
definitions of a particular symbol,
and then jump from there to the
API documentation for that symbol.
Something new in 2.0 is
Documentation Search,
and this is a natural language
interface to all of the documentation
available on the system for quick
and easy access to look up something
like hierarchical views on the fly.
And if the defaults that we provided
for you in the search process aren't
exactly what you normally work with,
you have the ability to bring
up a dialog for find options
to set up your controlling,
to control your match criteria and
also to limit what gets searched.
So, back to another demo.
As you can see,
we have the Help menu where the
Project Builder Help Center is
a natural part of it.
And then you have the Frameworks.
Scott Tooker, and Scott Tooker,
who is the executive director
of the Project Builder IDE team,
will be joining us shortly.
[Transcript missing]
And since it's a task,
it can have its own window
instantiated directly from the menu.
In here you'll see the overall
hierarchy of your classes and methods,
and your classes will show up in blue
to give you some differentiation.
But as you click on the various methods,
you go directly to the source
code in the attached editor.
As for example,
if you want to look at NSObject,
you'll find that
You have the ability to go
directly to some documentation
when it's normally available.
Yes.
Which actually points out something
interesting to point out about
2.0 since I've made the snafu.
Unfortunately,
you have to run the PB Help Indexer.
This is only for the beta.
This will be fixed for Jaguar Final.
I'm not going to do it right now
because it takes a little bit of time,
and I don't want to
waste time in the demo.
But I just want to point people out,
if they don't see the help books,
just go ahead.
It's in the release notes.
You just have to run
this one tool using sudo,
and then you'll get all the help books,
and you'll get your index.
Okay, so we'll move on.
If you want to find out where
the file is that we're looking
at is in the group tree,
just click on the file and
do a reveal in group tree.
There's another context
manual shortcut for that.
And that'll drill down into the hierarchy
and get you directly to the file so
you don't have to hunt and peck for it.
And let's say you want to come
back to this file regularly.
Again, another shortcut for getting
back to a particular method
is to set a breakpoint on it.
Once this breakpoint is set,
it will be available in the project
window under the breakpoint tab.
And you can jump straight back to
where you were without losing a beat.
Okay, so let's move on and
bring up the Find window.
As I said, we have the common
standard textual search.
We can bring up and look
for Release Bracket,
let's say.
And this will give us all the places in
the code where we're releasing objects.
Single-clicking on the result will
give you a built-in editor view,
and double-clicking on it will
open it into a separate editor
if you want a larger context.
So, for people who want to go a bit
further and have a lot more control
over how their searches are done,
we have the regular expression searches.
Scott's going to do a demo here
where we do a search across the
entire project for all the places
where the copyright notice is.
So, something that is done commonly
every year when you have to update
your source code copyrights.
And then once we've found them,
we can actually go ahead and change those
copyright notices to the current year.
Let's do that on just one of the files.
So as you see, now we're up to 2002.
So, I'm not sure how much further
we can go with the definition
searches without the help,
but let's go ahead and try.
I guess we can do that.
We can do that.
Alright, so let's do a definition
search for init with frame.
And that'll give us all the places that
Project Builder believes that there's
information about init with frame.
: And in those cases where we did have,
where there's supposed to
be a book or where we have a
reference in the documentation,
you'll see a little book over here
you can click on and bring up,
just like we had in the previous
release of Project Builder.
[Transcript missing]
: For full documentation search,
which is one of the new features in 2.0,
you can type in natural language.
Tell me everything you know
about view hierarchies.
If I can type, I will do it.
And that'll cut across all the
available documentation and give you
a weighted result of the places that
it's found for view hierarchies.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so there we go.
And you can go directly to
view hierarchy information.
So...
If the find results or the find
criteria that we're using isn't
exactly what you do normally,
we do have the options dialog for
you to be able to set up custom
settings that you'll use regularly,
and that will pop back into the pop-up
later for you to be able to choose.
Okay,
so we'll come back to the slides again.
One of the common things
you'll need to do is be able to
navigate your code efficiently.
Well, Project Builder tries to provide
as many shortcuts as possible.
We have a symbols popup that will be
populated with all the information for
the particular file you're editing,
and there's some preferences
for that we'll look at.
And then you have the counterpart toggle,
which gets you directly to the
related file source if it's a header,
header if it's a source.
And then you have the loaded
files pop-up in history.
Now this is a little different
in 2.0 since we heavily use
the multi-window aspect,
and that means that every editor
is only going to show you the
history for that particular editor.
So if you have a file per editor,
the history is pretty thin.
But we can show you some
other ways to use that.
Next,
there's the included headers pop-up.
And this is a nice way to find out
where your code is being included
and what your code is including in
the case of headers and source files.
In this case, it will show you the
headers for this file.
Then you have some shortcuts for getting
directly to the definition of a symbol.
The command double-click shortcut on a
symbol also for going to documentation,
option double-click.
Next,
we move into standard editing of code.
We have some control over
tab and indent widths,
and we have since the December release
syntax-ware indenting.
And this is pretty useful if you're
in a hurry and you want to actually
have the editor help you finish code,
put in the finishing bracket,
format the file for you as you're going.
But in 2.0,
one of the new features is the ability
to assign an editor by file type.
So for the people who had the issue of
trying to have their HTML rendered versus
having their HTML displayed as source,
you now have some control over exactly
how that will work for your files.
Of course,
we have standard arrow key navigation
and some of the standard Emax
bindings for those familiar with Emax.
If those aren't enough,
you have the ability to set
your own custom key bindings.
And I know a lot of people on our
team have a wide variety of sets,
and it's interesting to see them
navigate in a different way.
Lastly, we have the file encodings
and line headings.
That's also per file if you want to
have some internationalized files.
And then we have the source code control.
So in Project Builder we're
heavily integrated with CVS.
That means you have a CVS menu
always available to you if you have
a CVS repository for your project.
It has the basic operations
for status on the files,
updating, reverting,
committing your changes,
adding and removing files,
and then the ability to do compares
against the base of the head revision and
against any two revisions arbitrarily.
We'll do a demo of that.
So we'll switch back to the demo.
So we'll bring up an editor window,
and we'll take a look
at the symbols pop-up.
As you see here,
there's a lot of direct symbol
information that you can jump to.
But if this isn't everything
that you want to have available
in the symbols pop-up,
there are some preferences for it.
So you can have marks and
www.microsoft.com/mechanics
In the editor you also have
the Counterparts widget,
which I mentioned.
This will take us to the header
from the source and vice versa.
That gives us two files
to look at in the history.
and the ability to move
backward and forward.
Something that's not in Scott's script,
but I wanted to show is if you want
to keep this one window open and just
keep editing in it without necessarily
obeying all of the multi-window features,
you can drag in a file from the
file list into the editor and
it will load in that editor.
and that'll give you the other
pop-up entry for that new file.
I think you pulled the same file in.
Anyway.
If you click and hold on
the Counterparts button,
this is where you'll get that list
of all of the included headers and
files that include you as a header.
It's very useful for finding out
how your code is tied together.
I think, I don't know,
did you get the documentation reset?
No, actually.
Okay, so for going to the definition,
we have that ability with
a command double click,
jump straight to the
particular line of interest,
and then hopefully we can option double
click and go to some documentation.
There's the one I want.
[Transcript missing]
So, I'm going to show people one thing.
Just the books.
If you've never seen the books before,
this is what they look like.
And so, if I can double-click on a book,
obviously it's going to come up.
So, wherever you see that book,
single-clicking on it will
put it in the same frame.
Double-clicking will bring
it up in its own window.
You'll find that's a general rule
across most of the multi-window UI.
We've moved towards supplying some of
the features of keyboard navigation,
so you'll see some differences
in how the lists operate.
Sometimes the list will
keep its focus in there,
which is unusual for
people who are used to it,
switching focus to the built-in editor.
But that's a different topic.
We can go into that in
the Q&A if you wish.
So, if you look at some of the
preferences for editing,
you see that you have the control over
your tab widths and your line endings.
And then for file encodings,
and the syntax were indenting.
You don't have to turn
this on if it bothers you.
If it gets in your way, turn it off.
If you like it, leave it on.
It's very useful.
Next we have the per-file editor.
And you can drill down and show
you exactly where we've assigned
editors to the HTML file.
So I guess the next step is to go back
and look at some of the CVS integration.
We have the CVS menu, as I said.
The files in the project list,
in the files and groups list
will give you some hint of what's
going on in the status for CVS.
It has the modified flag updated,
added and removed.
All of the operations you want
to do with CVS are usually
available under the CVS menu.
Let's take a look at the
The history for the file.
So bring up the info panel
on that particular file.
You'll see the history of all
the CVS check-ins that have
happened or commits for this file.
And this is where you can actually make
an arbitrary choice of two versions.
And, uh,
Then go directly to comparing
those and get a graphical
UI view of all the changes on a
per-change basis using File Merge.
Okay, so I think we'll go back
to the slides again.
We're on the home stretch.
Stop orbiting.
Okay.
So we move on to building.
This is where you spend a lot of your
time during your development processes,
building and debugging.
So you can define
targets and build styles.
Mike spoke quite a bit
about that earlier.
Your target editor gives you
a view onto that set of rules
or recipes for your project.
And then you have the build style
editor for doing the dynamic
overrides of some of your target
settings for debug versus deployment,
as an example.
Some of the other shortcuts we've
added into the toolbar but have
been available in the menu is the
ability to go directly to your active
target or build style or executable.
And then some build preferences
that we'll see in the demo
and I'll talk more about.
And then we'll do the actual
build and talk about some of
the warnings and errors that we
see as we're going through that.
So some of the new features,
this is the things that a lot of people
have been waiting to hear about for 2.0.
We have the GCC 3.1 support.
I'm sure you've heard
that enough times already.
I don't need to go into much detail.
But to help you shorten
your compile times,
which is a major issue
for Project Builder,
you have the persistent
front-end support now,
which is pre-compiled headers, basically.
But beyond that,
we're going to try and bring
this up to new features and new
functionality to get even better
turnaround time on your compiles.
Another little shortcut that we've added
is the ability to duplicate your targets.
If your project has two different
versions that are different enough
that build styles isn't enough,
you can duplicate the entire contents of
the target and then go back and edit it.
Then we have framework variants.
Now, an important point of this is
that you get one framework entity,
but you can have multiple
binaries in there.
You can have a debug version,
a performance version,
and then your shipping version,
and this is the resultant framework.
Some of you who are Java people
wanted some better UI feedback
or better UI support for
setting up your Java settings.
That's in 2.0.
And finally,
there's the script phases that
can actually operate on your
project after it's been built.
So once you've installed or
gotten to the point where you
need to do some post-processing,
you have the ability to
execute a script phase.
So that's good for cleaning
up and doing other things.
So once you've got the project to build,
you want to get your errors out,
you move into debugging.
We have the standard set of features
you're expecting in a debugger:
breakpoints, stack backtrace threads,
popup,
something that's pretty useful in 10
since your multi-threaded applications
are starting to become very,
very important.
Variable lists with some new
features I'll talk about in a second.
And then execution control
as you'd expect for step,
step, and two, et cetera.
And then if what we're providing
in the user interface isn't
enough for you in the GDB world,
you have a GDB console that
you can go and type in commands
directly without changing your
context out of Project Builder.
So, the new features.
Getting down to seeing what
your actual data looks like.
This is a very important feature
for anybody who tries to debug and
they need to be able to get past
just the hex address of something.
You'll see that the tip of the
iceberg that we've provided,
which is a step towards the full set,
is now the ability to see NSString values
directly in your variable list.
There'll be more coming,
I promise you that.
And now we have a new type column,
which allows you to see on a
one-to-one basis what each one of
the types of your variables are in
the context of the variable list.
And then the ability for Java programmers
to print descriptions directly to
the console within the debug window.
And finally,
if you want to set breakpoint, I'm sorry,
set watchpoints on your variables,
we're taking advantage of that
through the page protection
watchpoint support in GDB.
This is a very quick and very
useful way of tracking exactly
specific changes to variables.
So let's do the last demo.
take a look at the target editor.
Well, for the observant,
you'll find right away that this is
not exactly what you're used to seeing.
This is some of the new features
that are going into the real
Jaguar version when we're done.
It's a hierarchical view.
There aren't tabs anymore.
And whenever you select a particular
area of settings to operate on,
that is what's compiled -- I'm sorry,
that's what's assembled together
in the editor panel to the right.
So you have the ability to drill down
to specific areas of the settings.
We also have the ability to go to
the shortcuts for active targets,
active build style,
and active executable.
You'll see those in the upper
left corner of the toolbar.
It's a nice way to
navigate around quickly.
So let's take a look at some
of the build preferences.
This is where you'd have the ability to
set exactly where your target application
will build and still keep your symbols
and intermediate files separate.
This is a global setting
for Project Builder.
If you don't override it
on a per-project basis,
this is where the pieces will go.
So we'll take a look at... If you
check... If you bring up the info
window on the project itself,
this is where you have the ability,
as I said,
to override that location information.
And this project will build in a
different location if you tell it to.
Okay, so let's do a build.
You see that there is a
separate build window now,
and the log information is available.
You can collapse the panel if you want.
You can edit the window to
be exactly the size and form
factor you're interested in.
Now, we found an error,
so when you click on the error,
you go directly to that
line in the source code.
But if you double-click,
you get your editor,
so you have a larger context.
So let's fix the bug and move on.
So now we're going to go
into the debugging phase.
As you see,
this is the template that we defined.
This is the new view onto debugging.
So when we get to a breakpoint,
you see how the information is organized.
You have your stack frame,
your variable list,
you have your breakpoint tab open
with the breakpoints that you
currently have set in the application,
and you have your threads pop up.
Of course, you have your navigation
controls for step,
step into, step over, etc.
And then there's a different one
than most people are used to seeing,
which is a restart,
which allows you to quit and restart
without ending your GDB session.
Now, some of the things you're going
to see that I mentioned that are
new are the view onto the string.
You have your NSString content directly
available in the variable list itself.
It's very nice to actually
see below the curtain,
or below the sheets in this case.
And it's going to turn
on the type list column,
so you can see where your actual
variables relate to their types.
And as we go back to the slides,
That's actually it for me.
I'm going to bring Mike Ferris back to
give you some of the future directions.
Thanks.
and good demos.
Let me take this opportunity to mention,
yeah, definitely read the release
notes that came with,
especially the Jaguar seed.
As we saw there is the one
glitch with having the index,
the help so that PB can
show the book icons.
You'll need to do that
manually in the Jaguar seed.
It should happen
automatically in the April CD,
and it will certainly happen
automatically by the time we ship Jaguar.
So I want to talk a little bit about
where we're going with Project Builder.
And I figured that really, I mean,
All you really need to know would
be our group's mission statement.
And if you knew that,
you'd know exactly where we're going.
So here it is.
I hope that that answers
all of your questions.
All right.
But, you know, let's dive down a little
bit in some detail here.
We get a lot of bug reports.
We get a lot of ideas and
suggestions from all of you
who've been using Project Builder.
And that helps us to figure
out where we're going.
We also have a lot of our own
cool ideas and things that we'd
like to do and provide for you.
Like every other team in Apple,
we keep track of all of the
bug reports that come in using
our radar bug tracking system.
Your interface to that is through
the bug reporter site at the ADC.
We encourage you to submit
bugs when you find them,
submit enhancement requests
if you think you have a good
idea as to what we can do.
You also may hear us talk from time
to time if you subscribe to the
Project Builder users mailing list about
this list of features that we have.
And you'll say gee,
wouldn't it be great if
Project Builder could do this?
And we say yeah, yeah,
that's on the list.
Well, there is a list.
Just so you don't think
we're making it up.
This is part of the list.
So, you know,
I'll leave that up there for a moment,
so if any of you, you know,
see that your feature isn't on there,
you can just shout it out.
There's only two items
on here that aren't real.
So, you know, as you can see,
the point of this slide is that,
you know,
we have a lot of stuff that we really
want to do and we really want to provide.
And obviously we can't do it all at once.
The Project Builder team is not huge,
all right?
And so we need to
prioritize these things.
There are some major areas.
Let me talk in a little
bit of detail here.
So that list was all fine and good.
But we really want to support some
plugin APIs in the near future so
that you guys can actually help us
to implement some of the things.
We want to expose plugin APIs for many
different areas of Project Builder.
Some of the key ones that will probably
be coming first would be things like
plugin build tool support if you
have languages that we don't support
and you have a compiler and you want
to integrate it in Project Builder.
We'd like to support
plugin editors so that,
you know, you can do like the technical
publications group that Apple did
and provide a Project Builder plugin
that reads HTML documentation or that
reads whatever file type you want,
that it can happen right
inside Project Builder.
The other way around on that one,
we'd like to support an API that
lets us use other editors.
So if you really,
really like some other editor
instead of our code editor,
we'd like to let you use it.
We also would like to provide APIs for
new indexing engines for other languages,
debugger plugins, SCM plugins,
new preferences panes, new assistants,
project templates, all this stuff.
We want to do all of
this stuff eventually.
We're not going to do it all at once.
And you'll see,
hopefully in the near future,
some rolling out of various plugin
APIs that will let you guys get started
with various areas of this stuff.
We have a lot of ideas for
the editor and the indexer.
A lot of those are related.
We'd like to provide code completion.
We'd like to provide
some refactoring support.
We'd like to provide you with the ability
to edit your code from the class browser.
You know, I want to be able to select an
inherited method in my class and say,
"You know what?
Override this." I want to be
able to select a class and say,
"Make me a category on this
class," or "Make me a subclass of
this class." All of this stuff,
we'd really like to be
able to do this stuff.
Lots of stuff in the build
system that we'd like to do.
We showed you the new target editor,
but that's still showing you a sort
of a process-oriented view of things.
You have to tell us the
steps to build your target.
Ultimately,
we'd like to provide another view.
We'll probably have both,
so you can switch between them.
We'd like to provide you
another view that allows you to,
instead of so much telling
us how to build your thing,
tell us what your thing looks like.
And then we'll figure out what
the steps are to build it.
We'd like to provide more feedback
if you have a target and you're
looking at the build settings and
one of those settings would be
overridden by the current build style,
you should be able to tell that
by looking in the target editor.
You should be able to tell what the value
of a particular build setting would be
if you hit the build button right now.
You should be able to tell what files
need to be rebuilt before you build.
You should be able to, you know,
have some way of looking at
a build setting and not only
say what its current value is,
but how it got that value.
You know, it started out with this
in the target and then the
build style added this thing,
and, you know,
the product type that you have
selected added these other flags.
That kind of stuff,
we'd love to expose that.
Lots of areas for
improvement in the bugger.
We'd like to add, you know,
a lot more of this
opaque data type viewing,
which the NSString value, you know,
in the variable list is
just the beginning of.
We'd like to add support for, you know,
watch expressions.
Actually,
we've got some support for that that'll
be shown in the debugger session.
We'd like to add memory inspection
windows and register windows,
and there's lots of stuff in
the debugger we'd like to add.
There's lots of stuff all over
Project Builder we'd like to add.
We're really proud of what
we've done with Project Builder,
but we know that there's a lot
more stuff that we could do.
And I think that, you know, we're,
as a team, very enthusiastic about
doing all this stuff.
So the point of this is not to say,
"Yeah, all these things I'm talking about
are coming tomorrow." In fact,
it's more the opposite.
What I'm saying is,
there's so much stuff that we want to do,
it's not all coming tomorrow.
And, you know,
we can't really say when specific
things are coming because we don't
often know too far in advance.
what the most important
things are gonna be.
But you can help us decide.
We do, you know,
listen to external feedback.
We listen to internal feedback.
A lot of people at Apple use this stuff.
Often the needs for internal and
external developers are the same,
but sometimes there's some very
specific need for internal developers.
We have to factor all that in.
We also occasionally have stuff that's
going on with MacOSX as a whole
that's some new thing that's going
to need Project Builder support.
And so those platform initiatives
also feed into how we prioritize.
From your point of view, though,
the very important thing to keep in
mind is that if we don't know about
something that you'd like to have done,
we can't prioritize it.
So be sure you report
bugs when you find them.
Be sure that you file
enhancement requests.
Use Bug Reporter if you also want to use
the Project Builder users list or the
MacOSX tools feedback list to sort of,
you know, get some community reaction to,
you know,
whether your suggestion is a good one.
That's all fine,
but definitely use Bug Reporter.
So I hope we showed you some
good improvements today.
And I hope that, you know,
we'll be continuing to prove this
stuff for you as we go along here.
And that's the end of our
prepared program here.
And now I'm going to ask Godfrey
to come back up to run us through
the road maps and so forth,
and then do the Q&A.
Thanks.
Thank you very much, Mike.
What do you think, everyone?
- Hey everyone,
do you think they've done a great job?
Okay, the slide on the screen is
showing you more information
sources about Project Builder,
about our tools in general,
including the address for
the bug reporting page,
something that if you have a concern,
if you have an issue,
you should definitely go to the
bug reporter and send it to us.
We need to know this in
order to prioritize and
build our new feature list.
A roadmap to sessions to come
in the Tools track tomorrow
afternoon using Interface Builder.
For those of you who are just
beginning to get involved with
Interface Builder with nib files,
this will be a very,
very good session to introduce you to
the concepts and the means of working it.
Apple Performance Tool.
In addition to Project Builder
and Interface Builder,
we also supply on our CD in our
Tools package a suite of performance
tools so that you can optimize and make
your applications perform at their best.
On Friday, we go into great depth in
Project Builder to talk about how
you actually deliver applications,
how you can get the most
out of the build system.
A very, very good session.
I highly recommend that
you come to that one.
And of course, Friday after that session,
we have our development
tools feedback forum.
We'd love to hear your feedback.
I believe most of the team will be there
at the session looking to listen to you.
For contacts, I in technology management
remain a single point of contact
if you have specific needs.
If you're looking to
move to Project Builder,
if you're looking to integrate
something into Project Builder,
I'd like to hear about it.
I can help work a relationship
with the team as necessary.
We have a set of mailing lists.
The master address here
includes Project Builder users,
which allows all of you to collaborate
with each other as well as with us.
We get a lot of input from this.
We try to put a lot of input back.
And sometimes you can actually help
each other get your problem solved.
And we also have the development
tools engineering feedback address.
This is if you have an issue or a
feature request that you'd like the
entire engineering team in our tools
development organization to know about,
this sends your message to us internally
without broadcasting it to the world.
So this is often a way for you to
get in touch with the right people.
We all monitor this on a daily basis
and try to give feedback and try to
give responses on a very timely basis.
very timely basis.